Let's move on to the final section of this lesson,
file hashes and digital signatures. Let's dig in.
By the end of this section,
you'll understand what file hashes are,
understand what digital signatures are,
and determine the integrity and authenticity of a file,
where the file hashes fit in our three component model of
security, prevention and detection.
What is a hash?
In layman's terms, a file hash is a digital fingerprint that verifies a file,
is what it says it is,
and has not been changed.
A file is made up of blocks of data.
Hashing transforms it into a far shorter length that represents the original string.
Hashing is an algorithm that calculates a fixed size bit string value from a file.
A hash is usually represented in hexadecimal form.
It is important to note that a hash is not
encryption and that there is no decrypting of a file hash.
It is a one-way process.
Let's take a look at some examples of file hashes.
First up, MD5.
Message digest Algorithm 5 is a cryptographic hash function.
It has a 128-bit value.
It is typically expressed as a 32 digit hexadecimal.
How does it work? The message to be hashed is
modified to meet a specific mathematical size.
This is called padding.
It is then broken into four word lengths of 32 bits.
MD5 performs four rounds of this action.
If it detects a single change,
the entire hash will be different.
MD5 has proven to be slightly prone to collisions,
which means theoretically a duplicate hash could be created.
For that reason, it has been retired.
Our final example of file hashes is,
Secure Hashing Algorithm Version 2.
It was designed to replace Version 1.
When you think SHA256,
this is it. How does it work?
Pretty much all hash algorithms begin with
padding to set a standard length with which to operate.
Then the data is broken into blocks of 512 bits.
At this point, the hash algorithm is applied using
a complex mathematical formula that multiplies portions
of the bits with prime numbers and then a shuffling of the data.
Lastly, we have the output of 64 hexadecimal digits.
We'll close this lesson out with digital signatures.
Digital signatures are used for authenticity.
The person or site are who they say they are.
They use hashing algorithms,
like what we just learned about.
At this point they are signed using
the public key infrastructure we learned about in a previous section.
The hash is combined with the sender's private key and is sent to the recipient.
At this point, the signature is validated by using the public key.